# Linux

Linux reference

## Acknowledgments

Jason Cannon: Professional system admin, consultant, author

## TOC
1. [Intro](#what-is-linux)
1. [Reasons to Use Linux](#why-linux)
1. [Defining a Linux distro](#linux-distro)
1. [Install Linux](#install-linux)
1. [Log into Linux and SSH](#getting-connected-log-into-linux-ssh)
1. [Common Directories](#common-directories)
1. [Linux Shell](#linux-shell)

## What is Linux?
An operating system (OS), which is a collection of software that manages hardware resources and provides an environment to run applications. Allows applications to store information, send documents to printers, interact with users, and more. 

The term "Linux" most commonly refers to the Linux OS, but it also refers to the kernel. This is the core of the operating system and is the intermediary between hardware and software. Additional components are needed to supplement the kernel, like system libraries, etc. 

Linux is FOSS (Free/Open Source Software). 

## Why Linux?

Linux runs on multiple hardware platforms (phones, networking devices, PCs, supercomputers), while proprietary UNIX systems only run on specified hardware. 

It has a small footprint, which makes it compatible with older hardware. 

It works great for servers, since it's stable, reliable and secure; but it can also be used as a desktop. 

It's FOSS. 

## Linux Distro
A Linux distro, or distribution, is the Linux kernel + additional software like applications to create the full operating system. The software that comes installed by default can be removed and/or replaced. 

There are hundreds of distributions, each with a different focus, and many distributions are available to choose from and use depending on the need. 

Distributions can be commercial or non-commercial, for server use, for desktop use, for research, for multimedia, and others. Examples include Red Hat Enterprise Linux (RHEL), Fedora, Ubuntu, Debian, SuSE Linux Enterprise Server (SLES), and OpenSuSE). 

DistroWatch.com is a website to stay on top of new distributions available. 

The most common distros used in professional development are RHEL and Ubuntu. 
- RHEL is used most commonly at bank, airline, telecom, and healthcare organizations. To run RHEL, the license must be paid for. However, CentOS is an RHEL derivative that is free to use. 
- Ubuntu is most commonly used at startups, for SaaS (Software as a Service), social networks, and companies that rely on cloud-based platforms. 

Other non-business distros are Linux Mint, Debian, Mageia, Fedora, openSUSE, Arch Linux, and Slackware. 

Ultimately, Linux is Linux at the core, and choosing a distro over another doesn't have the potential to be the 'wrong' choice, per se. 

## Install Linux

Installation procedures vary between Windows and Mac. For all procedures, virtualization software is needed to install a virtual machine on top of an existing operating system. For Windows, [VirtualBox](https://www.virtualbox.org/) is an example of virtualization software to install a full Linux distro as a virtual machine (VM) on top of Windows. 

Common issues that may arise for booting a VM on Windows may be related to present anti-virus software. Disable the anti-virus software and/or restart the computer, then restart the VM. 

## Getting Connected: Log into Linux, SSH

If an OS image was used to install the distro as a VM, ensure the login information is known to access the desktop. 

If Linux is installed on a local machine, it's possible to access it through its GUI and terminal through virtualization software, like VirtualBox. However, if the connection needs to be established over the internet to a remote Linux server, an SSH or Telnet connection will need to be made to it. 

SSH (Secure Shell) is a network protocol whose primary purpose is to connect from one system to another over a network. SSH has replaced Telnet, a practically obsolete and less secure system. However, it may be needed for legacy systems. 

In order to connect to Linux over the network, a terminal emulator will be needed. For Windows and Unix, [PuTTY](https://www.chiark.greenend.org.uk/~sgtatham/putty/) is a free implementation of SSH and Telnet. 

## Common Directories
The most commonly accessed top-level directories include: 
- `/` - "root", the top of the file system hierarchy. 
- `/bin` - binaries and other executable programs. Some applications may be located here. 
- `/etc` - system configuration files. Control how applications and systems behave. 
- `/home` - home directories stated here. Stores separation of data between users. 
- `/opt` - optional or third party software that didn't come with the OS. 
- `/tmp` - for temporary space, typically cleared on reboot. Long-term data/files should not be stored here. 
- `/usr` - user related programs. Subdirectories like `bin/` within user contain binaries/executables for these programs, and `local/` for third-party apps. 
- `/var` - variable data, most notably log files (generated by OS or applications). 

Other directories include: 
- `/export` - shared file systems
- `/lib` - system libraries
- `/lib64` - system libraries in 64-bit
- `/lost+found` - used by file system (fs) to store recovered files after a file system check has been performed
- `/media` - used to mount removable media like CD-ROMs. `/cdrom` is an alternative naming for this purpose on other distros. 
- `/mnt` - used to mount external file systems
- `/proc` - provides info about running processes
- `/root` - home directory for root account
- `/sbin` - system administration binaries
- `/srv` - used by OS to place data that is served by the Linux server (ex. web files, FTP)

Applications that are installed to a Linux OS that weren't bundled with it may be installed in `/usr/local/...`, with the application name replacing the dots. Subdirectories for that application are placed in the application's folder. For example, for an application named `hello`, `/usr/local/hello/bin` would contain binary/executable programs for the Hello application, `/usr/local/hello/etc` would contain system config files for Hello, and so on. 

Application installations won't always follow this strict pattern. The following directory structure can be seen as well, for one application installation: 

```
/etc/opt/hello
/opt/hello/bin
/opt/hello/lib
/var/opt/myapp
```

## Linux Shell
The default interface to Linux. 